# (Chestertons Fence](https://fs.blog/2020/03/chestertons-fence/)

Chesterton’s Fence: A Lesson in Second Order Thinking

A core component of making great decisions is understanding the rationale
behind previous decisions. If we don’t understand how we got “here,” we run
the risk of making things much worse.

---

When we seek to intervene in any system created by someone, it’s not enough
to view their decisions and choices simply as the consequences of first-order
thinking because we can inadvertently create serious problems. Before
changing anything, we should wonder whether they were using second-order
thinking. Their reasons for making certain choices might be more complex than
they seem at first. It’s best to assume they knew things we don’t or had
experience we can’t fathom, so we don’t go for quick fixes and end up making
things worse.

Second-order thinking is the practice of not just considering the
consequences of our decisions but also the consequences of those
consequences. Everyone can manage first-order thinking, which is just
considering the immediate anticipated result of an action. It’s simple and
quick, usually requiring little effort. By comparison, second-order thinking
is more complex and time-consuming. The fact that it is difficult and unusual
is what makes the ability to do it such a powerful advantage.

Second-order thinking will get you extraordinary results, and so will
learning to recognize when other people are using second-order thinking. To
understand exactly why this is the case, let’s consider Chesterton’s Fence,
described by G. K. Chesterton himself as follows:

    There exists in such a case a certain institution or law; let us say, for
    the sake of simplicity, a fence or gate erected across a road. The more
    modern type of reformer goes gaily up to it and says, “I don’t see the
    use of this; let us clear it away.” To which the more intelligent type of
    reformer will do well to answer: “If you don’t see the use of it, I
    certainly won’t let you clear it away. Go away and think. Then, when you
    can come back and tell me that you do see the use of it, I may allow you
    to destroy it.”

---

Chesterton’s Fence is a heuristic inspired by a quote from the writer and
polymath G. K. Chesterton’s 1929 book, The Thing. It’s best known as being
one of John F. Kennedy’s favored sayings, as well as a principle Wikipedia
encourages its editors to follow. In the book, Chesterton describes the
classic case of the reformer who notices something, such as a fence, and
fails to see the reason for its existence. However, before they decide to
remove it, they must figure out why it exists in the first place. If they do
not do this, they are likely to do more harm than good with its removal. In
its most concise version, Chesterton’s Fence states the following: Do not
remove a fence until you know why it was put up in the first place.

Chesterton went on to explain why this principle holds true, writing that
fences don’t grow out of the ground, nor do people build them in their sleep
or during a fit of madness. He explained that fences are built by people who
carefully planned them out and “had some reason for thinking [the fence]
would be a good thing for somebody.” Until we establish that reason, we have
no business taking an ax to it. The reason might not be a good or relevant
one; we just need to be aware of what the reason is. Otherwise, we may end up
with unintended consequences: second- and third-order effects we don’t want,
spreading like ripples on a pond and causing damage for years.

Elsewhere, in his essay collection Heretics, Chesterton makes a similar
point, detailed here:

    Suppose that a great commotion arises in the street about something, let
    us say a lamp-post, which many influential persons desire to pull down. A
    grey-clad monk, who is the spirit of the Middle Ages, is approached upon
    the matter, and begins to say, in the arid manner of the Schoolmen, “Let
    us first of all consider, my brethren, the value of Light. If Light be in
    itself good—” At this point he is somewhat excusably knocked down. All
    the people make a rush for the lamp-post, the lamp-post is down in ten
    minutes, and they go about congratulating each other on their
    un-mediaeval practicality. But as things go on they do not work out so
    easily. Some people have pulled the lamp-post down because they wanted
    the electric light; some because they wanted old iron; some because they
    wanted darkness, because their deeds were evil. Some thought it not
    enough of a lamp-post, some too much; some acted because they wanted to
    smash municipal machinery; some because they wanted to smash something.
    And there is war in the night, no man knowing whom he strikes. So,
    gradually and inevitably, to-day, to-morrow, or the next day, there comes
    back the conviction that the monk was right after all, and that all
    depends on what is the philosophy of Light. Only what we might have
    discussed under the gas-lamp, we now must discuss in the dark.

As simple as Chesterton’s Fence is as a principle, it teaches us an important
lesson. Many of the problems we face in life occur when we intervene with
systems without an awareness of what the consequences could be. We can easily
forget that this applies to subtraction as much as to addition. If a fence
exists, there is likely a reason for it. It may be an illogical or
inconsequential reason, but it is a reason nonetheless.

    “Before I built a wall I’d ask to know
    What I was walling in or walling out,
    And to whom I was like to give offence.”

    — Robert Frost, “Mending Wall”

Chesterton also alluded to the all-too-common belief that previous
generations were bumbling fools, stumbling around, constructing fences
wherever they fancied. Should we fail to respect their judgement and not try
to understand it, we run the risk of creating new, unexpected problems. By
and large, people do not do things for no reason. We’re all lazy at heart. We
don’t like to waste time and resources on useless fences. Not understanding
something does not mean it must be pointless.

Take the case of supposedly hierarchy-free companies. Someone came along and
figured that having management and an overall hierarchy is an imperfect
system. It places additional stress on those at the bottom and can even be
damaging to their health. It leaves room for abuse of power and manipulative
company politics. It makes it unlikely that good ideas from those at the
bottom will get listened to.

However, despite the numerous problems inherent in hierarchical companies,
doing away with this structure altogether belies a lack of awareness of the
reasons why it is so ubiquitous. Someone needs to make decisions and be held
responsible for their consequences. During times of stress or
disorganization, people naturally tend to look to leaders for direction.
Without a formal hierarchy, people often form an invisible one, which is far
more complex to navigate and can lead to the most charismatic or domineering
individual taking control, rather than the most qualified.

It is certainly admirable that hierarchy-free companies are taking the
enormous risk inherent in breaking the mold and trying something new.
However, their approach ignores Chesterton’s Fence and doesn’t address why
hierarchies exist within companies in the first place. Removing them does not
necessarily lead to a fairer, more productive system.

Yes, doing things the way they’ve always been done means getting what we’ve
always got. There’s certainly nothing positive about being resistant to any
change. Things become out of date and redundant with time. Sometimes an
outside perspective is ideal for shaking things up and finding new ways. Even
so, we can’t let ourselves be too overconfident about the redundancy of
things we see as pointless.

Or, to paraphrase Rory Sutherland, the peacock’s tail is not about
efficiency. In fact, its whole value lies in its inefficiency. It signals a
bird is healthy enough to waste energy growing it and has the strength to
carry it around. Peahens use the tails of peacocks as guidance for choosing
which mates are likely to have the best genes to pass on to their offspring.
If an outside observer were to somehow swoop in and give peacocks regular,
functional tails, it would be more energy efficient and practical, but it
would deprive them of the ability to advertise their genetic potential.

---

All of us, at one point or another, make some attempt to change a habit to
improve our lives. If you’re engaging in a bad habit, it’s admirable to try
to eliminate it—except part of why many attempts to do so fail is that bad
habits do not appear out of nowhere. No one wakes up one day and decides they
want to start smoking or drinking every night or watching television until
the early hours of the morning. Bad habits generally evolve to serve an
unfulfilled need: connection, comfort, distraction, take your pick.

Attempting to remove the habit and leave everything else untouched does not
eliminate the need and can simply lead to a replacement habit that might be
just as harmful or even worse. Because of this, more successful approaches
often involve replacing a bad habit with a good, benign, or less harmful
one—or dealing with the underlying need. In other words, that fence went up
for a reason, and it can’t come down without something either taking its
place or removing the need for it to be there in the first place.

To give a further example, in a classic post from 2009 on his website, serial
entrepreneur Steve Blank gives an example of a decision he has repeatedly
seen in startups. They grow to the point where it makes sense to hire a Chief
Financial Officer. Eager to make an immediate difference, the new CFO starts
looking for ways to cut costs so they can point to how they’re saving the
company money. They take a look at the free snacks and sodas offered to
employees and calculate how much they cost per year—perhaps a few thousand
dollars. It seems like a waste of money, so they decide to do away with free
sodas or start charging a few cents for them. After all, they’re paying
people enough. They can buy their own sodas.

Blank writes that, in his experience, the outcome is always the same. The
original employees who helped the company grow initially notice the change
and realize things are not how they were before. Of course they can afford to
buy their own sodas. But suddenly having to is just an unmissable sign that
the company’s culture is changing, which can be enough to prompt the most
talented people to jump ship. Attempting to save a relatively small amount of
money ends up costing far more in employee turnover. The new CFO didn’t
consider why that fence was up in the first place.

---

Chesterton’s Fence is not an admonishment of anyone who tries to make
improvements; it is a call to be aware of second-order thinking before
intervening. It reminds us that we don’t always know better than those who
made decisions before us, and we can’t see all the nuances to a situation
until we’re intimate with it. Unless we know why someone made a decision, we
can’t safely change it or conclude that they were wrong.

The first step before modifying an aspect of a system is to understand it.
Observe it in full. Note how it interconnects with other aspects, including
ones that might not be linked to you personally. Learn how it works, and then
propose your change.